Todo-List / State:

- Translation: open
- Content completely cleared: open
- Expression and didactics checked: open
- Spelling checked: open

Ready for publishing: no

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Lab-Anpassungen

Technical details of RawTherapee's Vibrance tool, in English:


[RawTherapee's Vibrance
tool](http://jacques.desmis.perso.neuf.fr/RT/vibrance2.html)

Additional detailed references, in French:


["Lab adjustements" and additives
"vibrance"](http://jacques.desmis.perso.neuf.fr/RT/Labadj_vibr.html)

["Colorimetry"](http://jacques.desmis.perso.neuf.fr/RT/ColorRT2_6.html)

![](Lab_color_space.png "Lab_color_space.png")
[Lab](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lab_color_space) (also called CIELAB
or L\*a\*b) is a three dimensional color space designed to approximate
human vision, as opposed to the RGB color space which models the output
of physical devices rather than human visual perception. It keeps the
tone (also called lightness or value) separate from the color, so that
you can adjust one without changing the other.

- The L component closely matches human perception of lightness.
- The a component defines how green/magenta the color is.
- The b component defines how yellow/blue the color is.

## Lightness

When using the Lightness slider in the Lab section, a tone curve is
applied to the L-channel of the Lab color space. As with the brightness
slider in the Exposure section above, the black point and the white
point do not move.

## Contrast

The contrast slider in Lab increases or decreases the contrast of the
photo, again applied to the L-channel. In developer's terms: this slider
applies a contrast curve centered at the average lightness level.
Tonalities above the average are lifted (lowered), while tonalities
below the average are lowered (lifted).

## Chromaticity

The Lab Chromaticity slider increases or decreases the chromaticity of
the image, by applying a contrast curve to the a- and b-channels of Lab
space. Setting this slider to -100 removes all color, making the image
black and white. The best way to convert an image to black-and-white is
by using the dedicated and powerful *Black-and-White* tool in the
*Color* tab.

## B&W Toning

The "*B&W toning*" checkbox is deprecated from version 4.0.12 and is
replaced by the *[Black-and-White](Black-and-White "wikilink")* tool
located in the *Color* tab. For backwards compatibility, when opening
processing profiles where "*B&W toning*" was used, the *Chromaticity*
slider will get automatically set to -100, providing the same effect.

## Avoid Color Shift

Fits the colors of the image into the gamut of the working color space
and applies [Munsell
correction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Munsell_color_system) to
retain color purity.

## Restrict LC to Red and Skin Tones

When enabled, it restricts the effects of the *Lightness According to
Chromaticity* (*LC*) curve, so that you can make skin fairer (by
increasing the lightness of the skin) without affecting the model's
clothing or background.

## Red and Skin Tones Protection

When enabled, the effects of the Chromaticity slider and the CC curve
will not be applied to skin colors, so that you can increase the
chromaticity of your photo without causing skin to appear oversaturated.

## Kurven

Lab Adjustments provides a wealth of curves to alter the look of the
image. Below are illustrated explanations of each curve.

### L Kurve

![](Lab_L_BA.jpg "Lab_L_BA.jpg") The L curve allows to control output
lightness based on the input lightness, L=f(L). The histogram on the L
curve reflects lightness prior the Lab adjustments. This curve allows
you to control the lightness without affecting color.

An S-shaped curve applied to the L channel increases image contrast. At
the same time this leads to a perceptually desaturated look.
Chromaticity adjustments can be used to compensate for this effect.

### "a" and "b" Kurve

The "a" and "b" curves allow to control output "a" and "b" channels
based on the input "a" and "b" channels respectively, a=f(a) and b=f(b).

As indicated by the color bars, the "a" curve allows one to shift colors
between green and magenta, and the "b" curve to shift between blue and
yellow. This can be used to apply color toning effects.

#### Black-and-White Color Toning

Color-toning a black-and-white image can be done using one of two
methods: the recommended and most intuitive method is by using the
[Color Toning](Color_Toning#Black_and_White "wikilink") tool along with
the Black-and-White tool. The other, less powerful method is using the
a\* and b\* curves of the L\*a\*b\* Adjustments tool once the image is
desaturated. The reason we still describe how to do it without using the
Black-and-White and Color Toning tools is that these tools are
relatively new additions to RawTherapee, and maybe you're stuck using an
older version which lacks these tools, or you're just curious what your
options are.

Read about color-toning a black-and-white image the recommended way on
the [Color Toning](Color_Toning#Black_and_White "wikilink") tool's page;
this section describes how to do it by using the a\* and b\* curves.

First you need to make the image black-and-white. Do this using any of
the available methods: either using the Black-and-White tool, or by
decreasing saturation in the Exposure tool, or by decreasing
chromaticity in the L\*a\*b\* Adjustments tool. Each tool will lead to a
different effect since they work in different ways and in different
color-spaces. It's just a matter of taste. Once the image is reduced to
grayscale you can give the image a tone by using the a\* and b\* curves.
To copy just color toning from one image to another, copy the current
processing profile to clipboard
![Image:Gtk-copy.png](Gtk-copy.png "Image:Gtk-copy.png"), then
partial-paste it either by right-clicking on a photo in the *File
Browser* and selecting "*Processing Profile Operations \> Paste -
partial*", or from the *Image Editor* tab by Ctrl+clicking on "*Paste
profile from clipboard*"
[image:Gtk-paste.png](image:Gtk-paste.png "wikilink") to paste only the
*L\*a\*b\* Adjustments* section of the profile. Note that other
adjustments in the *L\*a\*b\* Adjustments* sections will be pasted as
well. Alternatively, the a\* and b\* curves can be copied and pasted
individually. This is another reason for using the recommended method,
because it's easier, more precise, to copy and paste the Color Toning
and Black-and-White tools.

### LH Kurve

![](Lab_LH_BA.jpg "Lab_LH_BA.jpg") The LH curve (lightness according to
hue) allows to modify the lightness based on hue. To lighten the colors
of the particular hue, move the desired point on the LH curve up, and to
darken - down.

### CH Kurve

![](Lab_CH_BA1.jpg "Lab_CH_BA1.jpg") The CH curve (chromaticity
according to hue) allows to control output chromaticity based on the
input hue, C=f(H). Using it you can very easily boost or mute only a
selected range of colors.

### HH Kurve

![](Lab_HH_BA.jpg "Lab_HH_BA.jpg") The HH curve (hue according to hue)
allows to alter the hue for a specified hue. For example, one could
shift reds to be more orange by moving the red point up until the thick
horizontal line that appears as the point is being dragged becomes the
color you desire. RawTherapee has two HH curves, one in the Lab tools in
the Exposure tab, and one in the HSV tool in the Colors tab. The HH
curve in the Lab tools has a more restricted range compared to the HH
curve in the HSV equalizer, to allow finer adjustments. The range is
between the previous and next color, e.g. green could be changed within
the range of yellow and blue (as you can see in the curve on the
screenshot above). This is useful, for example, for fine-tuning skin
tone appearance, removing a greenish pale look by shifting reds and
yellows a little towards magenta.

### CC Kurve

The CC curve (chromaticity according to chromaticity) allows to control
output chromaticity based on the input chromaticity, C=f(C). The
histogram on the CC curve reflects chromaticity before the adjustment.
This allows you to separately adjust the chromaticity of pixels of low
and high saturation, so you can boost saturation where needed without
causing already saturated zones to clip.

Image:Lab_CC_BA1.jpg\|Boost low chromaticity, mute high chromaticity.
Image:Lab_CC_BA2.jpg\|Mute low chromaticity. Image:Lab_CC_BA3.jpg\|Mute
low chromaticity.

You can use the Show/Hide chromaticity histogram button
![Image:HistChro.png](HistChro.png "Image:HistChro.png") besides the
histogram to help you see the effects of your CC curve tweaks on the
histogram, and to help you find the maximum value before you start
clipping colors.

Image:Lab_CC_hist_neutral.png\|Smooth chromaticity histogram with
neutral CC curve. Image:Lab_CC_hist_clipped.png\|Spiked chromaticity
histogram with too strong CC curve.

The screenshots show what the chromaticity histogram looks like for the
untouched image, and then what happens when you increase chromaticity
too much (you can do this using the Chromaticity slider, or, as in the
screenshot, by sliding the top-right point of the CC curve to the left.
Holding the Shift key while you slide the point will help you keep the
point at the top).

To find the maximum chromaticity boost you can apply without causing
nasty spikes, which will appear as sudden flat regions of color in the
image, similar to posterization, all you need to do is click Show/Hide
chromaticity histogram if you havenâ€™t done so already, and then slowly
boost chromaticity until you notice the histogram begins to spike. The
curve does not have to be linear of course.

### LC Kurve

The LC curve (lightness according to chromaticity) allows to control the
output lightness based on the input chromaticity, L=f(C). You can use it
on portraits to lighten skin

Image:Lab LC BA1.jpg\|Lighten low-chromaticity zones. Image:Lab LC
BA2.jpg\|Lighten skin tones.

The LC curve's action is modulated by the *Restrict LC to red and skin
tones* checkbox. Thus the LC curve provides a complex image control,
altering lightness based on image chromaticity and also targeting a
specified range of hues. With this option enabled, the lightness of only
red and skin tones is affected, for example allowing you to make skin
fairer and conceal wrinkles and blemishes while preserving the color of
the model's clothes and background. When it is disabled, the LC curve
acts on other colors as well.

The coloring of the bar on the horizontal LC curve axis changes to
reflect which colors the curve applies to, as chosen by the state of the
Restrict LC to red and skin tones checkbox.

### CL Kurve

The CL curve (chromaticity according to lightness) allows to control the
output chromaticity based on the input lightness, C=f(L). It allows you
to separately control the chromaticity of regions of the image based on
their lightness, so you can for example decrease the chromaticity of
shadows if they are noisy or for artistic purposes, or increase the
chromaticity of dark and mid-tones without affecting the bright sky.

Image:Lab CL BA1.jpg\|Increase chromaticity of light areas without
saturating shadows. Image:Lab CL BA2.jpg\|Chromaticity of dark and
mid-tones increased without saturating the sky.