<span style="color: #000000; background: none; overflow: hidden; page-break-after: avoid; font-size: 2.0em; font-family: Georgia,Times,serif; margin-top: 1em; margin-bottom: 0.25em; line-height: 1.3; padding: 0; border-bottom: 1px solid #AAAAAA;">Le
plugin Gimp </span>

This article describes how to make it possible to have GIMP open raw
images by using RawTherapee.

It currently describes the method only for Linux. Windows and macOS
users are invited to contribute.

# Requirements

- RawTherapee 5.2
- GIMP 2.9.5
- The `file-rawtherapee` plugin

# Installation

1.  Perhaps in the future the RawTherapee installer or even GIMP itself
    will contain the plugin. For now you must compile it yourself.
    - If you already have [the source
      code](Linux#Clone_the_source "wikilink"), go into the
      `tools/gimp-plugin` folder.
    - If you do not have the source code, just download these files:
      [`file-formats.h`](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Beep6581/RawTherapee/dev/tools/gimp-plugin/file-formats.h)
      and
      [`file-rawtherapee.c`](https://github.com/Beep6581/RawTherapee/raw/dev/tools/gimp-plugin/file-rawtherapee.c)
2.  Compile the plugin: `gimptool-2.0 --build file-rawtherapee.c`
3.  Install the compiled plugin. To find GIMP's plugins folder run GIMP
    and look in Preferences \> Folders \> Plug-Ins. For example:
    - Install for the current user only:
      `cp file-rawtherapee ~/.config/GIMP/2.9/plug-ins`
    - Install for all users:
      `sudo cp file-rawtherapee /usr/lib/gimp/2.0/plug-ins`
4.  Let the plugin find RawTherapee by making sure that `rawtherapee`
    and `rawtherapee-cli` executables can be found on `$PATH`:
    - If you installed RawTherapee system-wide using a package manager,
      you're probably all set.
    - If you're running RawTherapee from some custom folder, e.g.
      `~/programs/rt` then you have two options:

    1.  Either sudo-edit the `/etc/environment` file and add a line like
        this but with the correct path:
        `export PATH=$PATH:$HOME/programs/rt`
    2.  Or symlink the executables into /usr/bin:
        `sudo ln -s ~/programs/rt/rawtherapee /usr/bin/rawtherapee && sudo ln -s ~/programs/rt/rawtherapee-cli /usr/bin/rawtherapee-cli`
5.  Lastly, setup GIMP. Go to Edit \> Preferences \> Image Import and
    make sure that "Raw Importer" is set to the file-rawtherapee plugin.
6.  Done.