<div class="pagetitle">

Download links for development versions

</div>
<div class="headline">

If you want to try the latest tools and bug fixes and can't wait anymore

</div>

## Intro

Below you can find the latest (or close to it) development version of
RawTherapee, in case you need to follow some tutorial which is using a
development version of the program.

Take into account that those will be **development versions**, and that
mean that you may face instabilities, crashes or incompatibilities with
previous versions. However, they are usually very stable and you may
still be very happy with them. And in case you face some problem, you
can also help the developers [reporting the
misbehaviors](How_to_write_useful_bug_reports "wikilink"), so they are
aware of them and will have the opportunity to fix them.

This page will be updated regularly (once a week or so), but if it's not
and you are in a hurry, you can always find the latest builds
(«versions») in the [RawTherapee nightly builds
page](https://github.com/Beep6581/RawTherapee/releases/tag/nightly).
When you go there, please ignore any file ending in «**.sha256sum**», or
«**.hash**».

## Linux builds (Appimages)

<big>'''Download link: [latest Linux dev build in Appimage
format](https://github.com/Beep6581/RawTherapee/releases/download/nightly/RawTherapee_dev_5.8-2735-g8bb06c2_20210121.AppImage)</big>

*Next explanation taken from [Appimage
quickstart](https://docs.appimage.org/introduction/quickstart.html#ref-quickstart)
and sligthly edited.*

**How to run an AppImage?**

It’s quite simple to run AppImages: all you have to do is download them,
make them executable and run them. Here you can see how to do it using
the GUI:

- Open your file manager and browse to the folder where you have placed
  the *AppImage* file (make sure you have writing permission in that
  folder)
- Right-click on the *AppImage* and click the *Properties* entry
- Switch to the *Permissions tab*
- Click the the appropriate checkbox depending on the file manager you
  are using:
  - *«Allow executing file as program»* checkbox if you are using a
    *Nautilus-based* file manager (*Files, Nemo, Caja*)
  - *«Is executable»* checkbox if you are using *Dolphin*
  - *«Execute»* drop down list to *«Anyone»* if you are using *PCManFM*
- Close the dialog
- Double-click on the *AppImage* file to run RawTherapee

## Windows builds (in portable format)

Portable applications are those that doesn't need to be installed: you
just place them in a folder where you have write permission, and run the
program double-clicking on it.

<big>'''Download link: [latest Windows dev build for x64
processors](https://github.com/Beep6581/RawTherapee/releases/download/nightly/RawTherapee_dev_5.8-2826-gca5a9a26d_20210322_win64.zip)</big>

**How to run this portable RawTherapee?**

Just uncompress (unzip) the downloaded file in a folder where you have
write permission and when finished, double-click *«rawtherapee.exe»*.

You may see a warning about an unknown publisher, but you can just
ignore it.

## MacOS builds

You will always have the latest build in the [packager
website](https://keybase.pub/kd6kxr), among builds for older MacOS
versions, in case the link below is too old or too new for your system.

<big>**Download link: [latest macOS
build](https://keybase.pub/kd6kxr/RawTherapee_OSX_10.12_64_5.8-2813-gbb08b6bed.zip)**</big>

**How to run this macOS RawTherapee?**

Uncompress the downloaded file into your *Applications* folder and
double-click on the new RawTherapee icon.